okay
trying to be honest with my therapist
but not so honest that i get
involuntarily hospitalized
okay so we're going to talk a little bit
about
involuntary hospitalization this is just
gonna be kind of educational all right
so first question chat is what is the
goal of hospitalization
y'all know so like the goal of
hospitalization is
is really for like safety and
stabilization so i know this sounds kind
of weird but like
99 of
patients who have come into my office
and said i have suicidal thoughts
i have not hospitalized okay so
involuntary
hospitalization is really only you
should be used in only like drastic
cases where there's like
an acutely elevated risk of safety so
i've worked with people who have been
suicidal
for like a year and they'll come to my
office and they're like
i'm thinking about killing myself and i
still may not hospitalize them in fact i
usually don't
so the main issue is whether there is an
acute elevation
a temporary elevation of your risk that
is very problematic in that moment
and if the answer to that question is
yes
then we will consider involuntary
hospitalization or at least me
personally
so that's also where i would think about
voluntary hospitalization so most of the
people that i've worked with like will
do a voluntary hospitalization which is
we'll i'll talk to them right and like
our goal so when i work with my patients
we have a shared goal the shared goal is
not to you know keep them living life
that is miserable
the shared goal is to try to help people
build a life that is worth living
so if i feel like they are so mentally
ill to where they're like acutely at
danger to themselves
then i may involuntarily hospitalize
them but generally speaking
you know psychiatrists and therapists
are not there to hospitalize you against
their will that's not what we're there
for
we're there to try to help you and just
because you're suicidal doesn't actually
mean that you belong in a hospital like
at least
i mean it depends on what kind of
suicidality so we'll go over that in a
second but
you know really the the question is can
you is the is the risk to yourself so
great
that you need to be in a controlled
environment for a temporary period of
time
and so this is where you know when i
work with people like i think about
the following factors one is
is there a temporary elevation to the
risk
do you have means or access to kill
yourself
do you have a plan to kill yourself so
like some people
are like i just want to die they don't
really have any plan to do something
whereas other people are and if i ask
them like you know do you have a plan of
what you would do they'd be like
yeah i jump off the golden gate bridge
and i'm like the golden great
bridge is in san francisco and you're in
boston so
would you buy a ticket and fly they're
like yeah i haven't really thought it
through
i'm like great so you probably don't
need to be hospitalized in that
situation
so the the first thing to remember is
that you know our goal is not to
hospitalize you against your will and
just because you're suicidal doesn't
mean that we're going to hospitalize you
it of course is a case-by-case basis
different clinicians have different
thresholds
i tend to be like a big believer in
patient autonomy
and and sort of like you know so i i
think that it's my job to really i mean
sometimes i'll involuntarily hospitalize
people because i
i don't think that their mind is working
properly and so we'll do something
called a capacity eval to see if their
their mind is actually functioning in a
way that's processing information
or they're too depressed to be able to
process information
but just because you're suicidal doesn't
mean that we're going to hospitalize you
in fact like
our goal is to help you not be
hospitalized
right so when i think about my job as a
psychiatrist
my job is to keep you out of the
hospital if possible
right so if you think about that's the
job of all doctors like if you go to a
primary care
physician and you've got like an
infection
the goal of the doctor is to keep you
from needing to go to the hospital
like we don't want to get this to a
point where you're septic the infection
is like
flowing through your bloodstream and
like you know it's affecting your entire
body the goal is to keep you out of the
hospital
it's not about cost savings for the
insurance company things like that
that's not what i'm talking about
what i'm talking about is generally
speaking we want to keep people
to a minimal level of illness
right so our goal and so the this is
where i'd strongly encourage you to talk
to your provider
if you're having suicidal thoughts
because it's their job to help you be
safe it's their job to help you
like deal with those thoughts hopefully
you know so you no longer have them or
they're like much more controlled or way
easier to deal with
because that's our job but if you don't
tell us because you're afraid of being
hospitalized like
yeah you could be hospitalized it's
possible but if you don't tell us
then like we can't help you with them
and the hospital is not really what we
want to do like that's not our go-to
it's like a
last resort that being said you know
there are some
providers who for medical legal reasons
or you know personal thresholds may
be have a lower threshold to hospitalize
people i
you know i can't speak for everyone um
but generally speaking i think that you
know if you have suicidal thoughts like
you should tell your provider and then
your provider will sort of ask you
certain questions
this is the other thing i know it sounds
shocking
but also if your provider wants to
hospitalize you
you got to really think about why they
want to
right because as trained professionals
we sort of know
what the risks are and so if you're like
really high risk for suicidal like
an actual suicide attempt and your
provider is telling you to do that
maybe you should go right because like
they kind of know what they're talking
about and
our goal really is to help you stay
alive and stay healthy
so you know don't hesitate to share your
your
your suicidal thoughts with your
provider this is also where like we like
we said we think about
acute elevations so has something really
drastic happen to you did you just get
dumped
you know do you have access to suicidal
means and that also is because if you
look at it eighty percent
of suicide attempts were cons
like actually the decision was made
within two to five minutes
i think maybe sixty percent is made
within 60 to 120 seconds of the attempt
so if you ask survivors of suicide
attempts and you ask them when did you
actually decide
that you were gonna kill yourself sixty
percent of them i think
say within one or two minutes and eighty
percent of them will say within five
minutes of the attempt
so it's a very common myth that most
people will plan out
their suicide attempt over a long period
of time that's why we ask so much about
access to stuff so if you have a gun in
the home the problem is that
if you have this idea and within 60
seconds you've got the gun you may
actually pull the trigger
so we try to control means if you have
to book a ticket to san francisco
like for next tuesday the likelihood
that that attempt will happen is
statistically way lower according to the
research as
as i understand it anyway based on my
last reading of it
and so that's why you know when the
provider tells you hey i really want you
to go to the hospital
they're not necessarily worried in that
moment what they're actually thinking
hopefully
is like what is the likelihood that that
little voice in your head
actually takes control of you for like
up to five minutes
and if the little voice that you fight
against on a daily basis can take
control of you in five minutes
what is the worst damage it can actually
do to you
that is our threshold to hospitalize
because when that risk
gets too high that's when we really
think about hospitalizing
and even then like what i'll do i mean
i've had cases where people have had
very high risk situations and it sort of
becomes like an issue of trust where
i'll explain this to them and say
i trust you now i get that you're
telling me that you're not actually
going to do anything
i'm concerned that you could change your
mind in the middle of the night so let's
get rid of the gun
so i'll talk to the person they'll talk
to their spouse or mom or whatever
and i tell them what i need to be
reassured is like i need your mom to be
with you and you all need to get rid of
the gun together and the three of us are
going to talk about it
and so as if we can be assured that you
don't have access anymore to make an
impulsive decision
because most suicide attempts are
actually impulsive decisions
then we can sort of like you know keep
you safe and if we can keep you safe on
the outside then
you know we don't need to hospitalize
you the last thing that
i know it's shocking but hospitalization
is not a magical cure for suicidality
so this is the other reason that i tend
to be really careful about when to
hospitalize people is because i really
have to ask myself what's going to
change within one week
now if you just got dumped by your
partner and you're like acutely suicidal
then like
absolutely in a week you could process a
lot you could be in a different head
space
so by all means like move towards
hospitalization so this is where the the
other thing that we talk a lot about in
psychiatry is
a chronically elevated risk of
suicidality which does not necessarily
warrant hospitalization
some people have a chronically elevated
risk of suicidality
which means that they're sort of
constantly like high risk to be
suicidal and even if it's scary it
doesn't necessarily mean that you need
to be hospitalized because it's unclear
like what will happen over the course of
the 10 days that you're in the hospital
if it's not going to actually make an
impact we just
personally we just kind of ride out the
risk right we talk about it
we i'll oftentimes try to talk to a
patient's family member spouse or
parents or something like that we say
hey here's the situation
what do you guys want to do we can try
hospitalization we cannot try
hospitalization
and based on my assessment this is a
chronically elevated risk
is it scary absolutely but i don't know
that hospitalizing you for five days is
going to change something
yeah so rihanna's saying my first time
calling the suicide hotline was last
thursday
good that you called and don't hesitate
to call again
and like go to the emergency room if
you're feeling like you're in a bad spot
so this is the thing is like remember
hospitalization is sort of like
it's like it it's it's basically the alt
for the psychiatry profession right like
we don't spam your alt
you can't spam your all doesn't do any i
mean i guess theoretically would be good
to spam your all but like
that's not it's a bad analogy i suppose
so it's it's you know it's it's like
this thing that's on a cool down for in
order for it to be effective
you know but i guess it's in games if
you could spam your all you would but
that's not how we work in psychiatry so
i need a different analogy
it's like it's like a cool down that
like you know
it's like blood magic let's say like
where you like lose a portion of your hp
to like cast a powerful spell
but you can't spam that [ __ ] so
generally speaking i try not to spam
hospitalization and use it only when
necessary
yeah it's lay on hands yeah so shrapnel
sacrifice that's what constitutes a
suicide attempt providers ask me about
my past attempts
i've been told that having the means and
almost doing it doesn't count as an
attempt
i don't know so this is where like
providers are going to be different
you know some people will say it counts
as an attempt some people will say it
won't count as an attempt
i think about so what i do is i do a
risk formulation so it's not so much
about
you know what is or isn't it's not
binary
it's like a risk assessment that's on a
scale
so is this person low risk medium risk
high risk chronically elevated risk
acutely elevated risk like there's a lot
of dimensions to assessing risk
right and this is where we talk about
means history
current mindset circumstances current
stressors
all those kinds of things kind of factor
in dazzle actually dazzle
is is a great example of what a
hospitalization is
that's beautiful dean 77944
that's actually the best gaming analogy
i can think of
so if you guys play dota you know this
but if you don't there's a hero named
dazzle who has an ability called
it's not as alt but it's it's shallow
grave is what i was thinking
um where shallow grave like it doesn't
heal you but it prevents you from dying
for a temporary period of time
and so when you like shallow grave
someone like you can keep them alive for
like you know a certain period of time
but like they're not actually going to
be healed
so as soon as shallow grave ends if they
take
you know any damage they could still die
so what i think about a hospitalization
is sort of like a shallow grave so it's
like a temporary measure that keeps you
alive
but in my experience hospitalization can
sometimes fix things
but it's really about like healing you
back to full that's the important part
axe chocolate i knew i knew axe
i knew calling blade was going to come
up i knew it
i don't i don't know what the i don't
know the sort of the analogy falls apart
max's blink axe is on your team chat